---
layout: post
title:  How (Not) to Argue with a TERF
date:   2020-08-05
description: Navigating the rhetorical minefield of sex/gender essentialist transphobia.
---

:bangbang: Content Warning: The following contains frank discussion of transphobia and transphobic rhetoric.  

# Tranpshobia That Shall Not Be Named

In recent months, a certain children's book author :zap: has been saying the quiet part out loud.

Since JKR's tweets delegitimizing trans womanhood, I've seen an explosion of scientists speaking out in support of trans folks and denouncing people who try to use the science of sex and the sociology of gender to push transphobic arguments. I've seen geneticists speaking up about their knowledge about sex determination; I've seen evolutionary biologists discussing the diversity of sex differentiation systems on our planet; I've seen medical scientists speak about trans health care and its importance in the medical field. 

I've also seen a deep lack of understanding from scientists about the specific type of transphobia they are up against. 

Transphobic rhetoric of the type employed by JK Rowling is complex. It is based not in a lack of understanding of science, but a _weaponization_ of it. Therefore, if you as a scientist want to speak out against this kind of hateful rhetoric, you do **not** simply need to explain your science better. You need to understand the **background** and the **subtext** of anti-trans rhetoric, and speak against _that_.  

This is, optimistically, a guide to do just that. 

# A Transphobe by Any Other Name

The title of this blog post refers to TERFs, or Trans Exclusionary Radical Feminists. This is the common term, and the one I used to get you to recognize and click on this, but it isn't the term I'll use for the remainder of this post. 

I dislike the term _TERF_ not because it is sexist (it isn't) or because it is a slur (it VERY MUCH isn't), but because "Trans-Exclusionary [Radical] Feminist" is an oxymoron. One cannot be a feminist and be trans-exclusionary, just as one cannot be a feminist and be a racist, or one cannot be a feminist and be ableist. Feminism is about the liberation, not the classification and exclusion, of women. 

Therefore, for the rest of this post, I will use the term _sex/gender essentialist_ rather than _TERF_. 

:book: _Sex/gender essentialism_ refers to rhetoric that relies on appropriating and misusing feminist rhetoric and scientific understanding to reach transphobic conclusions. Someone who employs sex/gender essentialism is a _sex/gender essentialist_. 

# Assumptions and Axioms

I am assuming if you're reading this, you have a basic background understanding of:

1. **The science of sex and gender.** If you need more background reading on this topic, see [Project Biodiversify](https://projectbiodiversify.org/). 
2. **Trans issues.** I am assuming you understand terms like "trans woman" refer to a woman who was not assigned female at birth. If you need a more basic brush-up on trans issues, I actually think social networking forums like [r/transgender](https://www.reddit.com/r/transgender/) on reddit are a great places to start. Just remember to _listen_, not speak.
3. **Common misconceptions the average layperson has about sex and gender.** E.g., you already know many people assume in all cases XX = female and XY = male, and that this is the basis of many people's ignorance and confusion surrounding trans people. If you want to know more about this topic, just spend 15 minutes on Twitter.

# The Thick of It

From here on out is a guide to sex/gender essentialism in several parts:

* The **central argument** that sex/gender essentialists employ
* The **common rebuttals** that scientists use -- and why they don't work
* The **antidotes** that we can use instead

# Central Argument: Sex Discrimination

At the core of sex/gender essentialism is the idea that the oppression that women face in Western society[^ww] is based in discrimination against their sex. That is, it is not being a _woman_ that is policed; it is being _female_. Discrimination is supposedly based primarily on biological functions: childbirth, child-rearing, menstruation, birth control, gynecological health, and more are devalued or stigmatized in society, and that is the common mode of oppression which women experience. 

This is why, therefore, trans women can only ever be called _trans women_ and not _women_: because trans women do not experience _sex discrimination_ and do not understand or relate to the oppression of womanhood.

This is also why trans men are pitied by sex/gender essentialists: because trans men, in their minds, have experienced sex discrimination to such a degree that they have rejected womanhood, and this is not a personal choice but a tragedy. 

Is there merit to the idea that cis women's bodies are heavily policed? Of course. But this fact can _and should_ coexist with trans liberation. The solution to a world that polices our bodies is not to police others'.  

**All rebuttals and arguments against sex/gender essentialism must address the fallacies and failures of the sex discrimination framework**. Otherwise, they _do not_ address the actual points being made, and _do not_ help properly inform people who are at risk of being drawn in by sex/gender essentialism. 

# Common Rebuttal 1: Sex is Not Gender

This is probably the most common scientific argument against transphobia, and in many cases it would be the best one. As scientists, we know that _sex_ is a biological phenomenon while _gender_ is a sociological one. I frequently see scientists discussing this separation as a key component of arguments against transphobia.

[Embed some tweets from scientists.]

However, remember that sex/gender essentialists know this separation exists; they are not denying it. In fact, many will declare that trans women are fre to express their gender in any way they want---but that the real central aspect of womanhood is their sex. Separating out sex and gender is not new information for sex/gender essentialists, and does not convince them of anything.

## Antidote: Sex and Gender are Intertwined

We actually have to _complexify_ our understanding of sex and gender and how the two relate, not simplify it. There are many wonderfully varied aspects to sex, from chromosomal sex to reproductive sex to secondary sex characteristics to societal presentation of sex. If we want to combat the notion that 

[Mama Doctor Jones]

# Common Rebuttal 2: Sex is a Spectrum

## Antidote: 

# Common Rebuttal 3: 

## Antidote: 

# 

# Qualifications, Limitations

Who am I to write a guide like this? 

1. **I am a lesbian woman.** Sex/gender essentialists often leverage lesbian womanhood to make their points; most lesbians I know have been targeted and/or recruited by sex/gender essentialists. This targeting and use of our unique and rich lesbian culture means I've waded through a _lot_ of sex/gender essentialism to curate my own understanding of my community. 
2. **I've lost friends to this rhetoric.** Like I said, most lesbians I know have encountered sex/gender essentialism before. Some of them become sucked in by it and its purported championing of lesbianism and protection of women. It's tempting for cis women, especially white cis women, to join a movement that centers them so completely. It is heartbreaking to watch it happen. 
3. **I'm a PhD student in genetic complexity.** My dissertation is on developing and applying metrics of complexity within genomes, so I know this stuff isn't easy or clear-cut. 

With all that said, **I am not trans.** I am a cis lesbian woman. You may have noticed I sometimes use they/them pronouns; this is not related to my gender but instead to my gender presentation (which would take a whole other blog post). I reached out to trans and intersex folks to read over this post for me and value their input, but any mistakes or missteps in language or representation of trans experiences here are mine and mine alone. I am happy to listen and learn. 

It is essential that cis people show allyship to the trans community. 

# Acknowledgements


[^ww] And it is almost always Western society, because sex/gender essentialism is overwhelmingly white. This makes sense not only because white women have a long and storied history of weaponizing their femininity to advance white supremicist modes of thought, but also because many indigenous societies have a long history of more expansive roles of sex and gender in society. To advocate for sex/gender essentialism, you must ignore that history.  